Key points for Axel presentation

I History
II Recommendations
a. Demonstrate an understanding of the history and culture of the client organization and its relevance to the case.

\Intro
When I first heard we were doing a case study on Axel Springer, I was pumped. "Welcome to the Jungle," "Sweet Child 'O Mine," I'm a huge Guns 'N Roses fan. But it turns out Axel Springer SE is not the lead singer of Guns 'N Roses. That's Axel Rose. Axel Springer is a German publishing company. So even though Axel Springer SE is not among the top 6 rock and roll bands of all time, it is among the top six largest digital publishers worldwide after it's recent acquisition of BusinessInsider.com.

\Michael Dopfner
Michael Dopfner, Axel Springer CEO, has a presence all his own. He is tall enough for professional basketball at 6 feet 5 inches in height. Not only is Dopfner's presence powerful by size alone, he has the smarts to go with it. Dopfner has a PhD in Musicology from the University of Frankfurt and was a music critic before becoming the youngest CEO of Axel Springer SE in 2002, at age 39. When asked about his unusual path to CEO recently, he told an interviewer it was almost unheard of in Germany, saying, "That's actually not allowed."

\Bild.de
Axel Springer SE's largest publication is a tabloid (Bild), but the CEO makes headlines worldwide as a principled, traditional, serious, future-oriented thought leader. At the time of the Stanford Business school case study, Dopfner's focus was to move Axel Springer SE from print revenue to half of all revenue from digital publishing. That was in 2014, but already Dopfner has taken Axel Springer SE to 75 percent revenue from digital publishing, as indicated on its corporate website as of this week.

\Google Results: "Michael Dopfner"
If you Google Michael Dopfner right now on your phone, the top result is likely an announcement that Axel Springer SE acquired BusinessInsider.com in part of its strategy to become the world's top digital publsher. Other results may include Dopfner's interview of Facebook CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, about the future of digital media. You may see that Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, has a personal equity company that owns stock in Axel Springer SE. Finally, you may also see links to Plug And Play, Axel Springer SE's accelerator for entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley and Berlin. Out of all the excitement, it is easy to look to the future of digital publishing, because Dopfner's vision is so clear. But to really understand Dopfner's vision for Axel Springer SE, the story starts in the past.

\History
It was 1946 (check) and a man named Axel Springer began a publishing company in Germany. Following World War II, it goes without saying these were times of social and political change in Germany. The press was especially important in giving a voice and sharing messages with the people of Germany, who were collectively finding a new normal for their society after their nation was hijacked by Hitler's Third Reich. Through these times, Axel Springer was known for truth in journalism. Impartial, honest, factual, high-integrity journalism was the core of Axel Springer's works. Fast forwarding a bit, the company relocated its headquarters to an office building overlooking the Berlin wall. They were, to borrow a sports analogy, at the 50-yard line and right in front of the action. They could see both sides of the wall from the office windows.

\Political Influence Continues
In some ways, this relocation was a powerful battle cry for what kind of company Axel Springer aimed to be. True to those roots today, Dopfner fights that good fight to preserve journalism as an important profession benefitting society. Journalism itself is threatened by low quality coverage without fact checks, in Dopfner's logic. Journalism, in the traditional sense, transcends print vs. digital media and will prevail. People need journalism to promote fairness and truth in human civilization. Axel Springer SE is uniquely qualified to act as a worldwide defender of journalism, having experienced first-hand what can happen when one party had too much control of the media in World War II Germany.

\Open Letter to Google
It is from this historical and social context that Dopfner wrote his open letter to Google about controlling what news people saw. Dopfner, and Axel Springer SE, are business persons who strongly believe journalism should be a paid, specialized profession.

\Facebook Denied
Following the influence of social media on the recent American presidential election, Facebook asked European publishers to fact check social media posts to help an algorithm block misinformation. Perhaps unsurpringly, Dopfner took a strong and public stance to say no. He said it was not the business of serious journalists and publishers to get involved with the problems of social media. All European media companies side with Dopfner except one small publisher in France with 20 employees, which is a drop in the bucket of all European Union publishers.

b. Identify and evaluate critical decisions made in the evolution of the case.

\Mid-presentation Recap
Since it's afternoon now, you have probably already heard many times how Bild was a crucial revenue stream for Axel Springer as it transitioned into a digital revenue model. One thing other consultants may not have reflected is the magnitude of this irony. The largest publication owned by Axel Springer SE is a tabloid called Bild. It's been the big print media revenue maker for decades at Axel Springer. It was also a huge success as a website, the particulars of which we will address momentarily. Yet the fact that such a large portion of the revenue is from a tabloid does not seem to undermine Axel Springer SE's reputation as a high-integrity, international defender of journalistic innovation and civil truth. Hey, we all like diversity, right? It makes the world a better place and gives strength by joining us together in differing worldviews, opinions, values, etc. Here's a great example with Axel Spr. and Bild.

I think that speaks to how strong the brand is. To celebrate Axel Springer's success with the tabloid, some of the later slides in this presentation are written in Tabloid format. I think you will see how hard it is to pull off a tabloid component in the context of a serious business consulting proposal. Hard to do, but that's exactly what their CEO has been doing with Axel Springer SE successfully for 15 years.

\Critical Decision Points

Bild to Bild.de
     Model of change management (evolutionary)
     
Silicon Valley
	Execs fly coach
	Plug and Play Accelerator
	Open Letter to Google
	
Acquisitions
	Sold most in 2013
	Big BusinessInsider.com
	    Acquired in 2015
	    Top 6 worldwide

c. Clarify the impact of past decisions on the current state of the client.

d. Provide recommendations for next steps, rationale for those steps, projected outcome, and a timeline. This would include such things as the desired culture, leadership roles, employees and their development. What should be retained from the existing organization, and what should be created or recreated as new? What role should leader(s) have going forward?

\ZUCK to DOPFNER: We Are Technology Company
Find allies in European media and Silicon Valley. During a Feb. 2016 interview, Dopfner asked Mark Zuckerberg if Facebook was a technology or publishing company. Zuckerberg said it was definitely a technology company. Going forward, I see Dopfner is intent on making Axel Springer SE a publishing company. That puts him at odds with Silicon Valley companies who specialize in technology. 

\ACCESS DENIED: Google Ranks Threaten Real Journalism
Google and Facebook have distribution and platform for people to reach each other, unlike Axel Springer SE. Google could block out Axel Springer SE and selectively promote other content. Dopfner is aware of this and wants to secure against this happening. He has written an open letter to Google's CEO about how Google should be fair and promote quality content. 

This is an interesting strategy. I think Dopfner has committed to the strategy for a long time, so it is not up for debate whether they should or should not pick the battle because they already did. Axel Springer SE established a Silicon Valley accelerator, but I do not see this being closely related enough to core strategy. Previously, Axel Springer was highly effective at merging opposing cultures. In the case of the Bild.de website, the new media team was in a separate building with different phone numbers, personnel, etc. Everything was different. Only after Bild.de built its own DNA and established itself did Axel Springer SE merge it back into the core company. 

\FROM DARWIN TO DOPFNER: Evolutionary Change
Axel Springer showed success when culture change was evolutionary, not revolutionary, at the operations level. The Bild and Bild.de example shows they know how to incubate a company. The plug and play Accelerator shows they know how to build that into a system-level strategy internationally. As I mention evolutionary change, you may be thinking that board members may have viewed change as revolutionary when flown to Silicon Valley via coach and put up in a budget hotel. In terms of operations, the company has shown success with evolutionary change strategies but we see in this example that change in large organizations is heterogenous.

\TRUE LIES: Reputable Publisher Owns Tabloids
Through integrity and being the voice of reason, Axel Sp. has achieved success. They established rules that their tabloid would not have German writers taking jabs at Polish writers, and vice versa. What Axel does best is demonstrate maturity and long-standing tradition through times of social unrest and inflection points in history. It made sense that Dopfner took a strong stance when Facebook asked European media companies to fact-check social media stories. Dopfner said no, it was not appropriate for legitimate media companies to provide this kind of service for social media. This is Axel Spr.'s brand. They are traditional, experienced, principled, and confident. Ironically, their biggest seller is a tabloid. Somehow these contradictions work for Ax. Spr.

\PSYCHIC POWERS? CEO Makes Bold Prediction
Going forward, Dopfner said the pendulum will swing back and people will want credible news instead of just free, low quality stories. If that is true, what's the benefit to Dopfner promoting accelerator Plug and Play, to connect Berlin with Silicon Valley? The idea is to give entrepreneurs resources in exchange for 5% ownership. It is focused in the sense that it keeps a connection to Silicon Valley culture, but it could be integrated further into the culture at Axel Spr. The biggest threat by Google and Facebook is that distribution and free, low quality stories will render Axel. Spr. irrelevant. What can happen going forward?

\CAN'T BEAT THEM, BUY THEM: Axel Springer SE's Acquisition Strategy
Acquisitions were a key strategy for Axel Spr. in the past but they divested in 2014. They acquired BusinessInsider for under $500 M in 2015, showing that acquisitions continue to be a successful strategy. Going forward, Dopfner aims to be the digital media leader in Europe. It gives them access to 76 million unique visitors monthly in English, for a total of 200 million unique views for Axel Spr. That makes Axel. Spr. the 6th largest publisher of digital media in the world (http://www.axelspringer.de/en/presse/Leading-Digital-Publisher-Axel-Springer-Acquires-Business-Insider_24619096.html)

\PRIME DIRECTIVE: We Will Lead the World, CEO Predicts 
Dopfner says the strategy is to be the world's top global digital publisher, with English diversified global distribution, and innovative digital journalism. I think it's hard to say how Dopfner is going to do this without building some kind of structured system to train people in the art and methods of journalism as Axel. Spring sees it. They are competing for distribution against technology companies when they go against Facebook and Google. In the announcement, Dopfner states proudly that Business Insider has the kind of innovative journalism they seek. Innovative journalism is a subjective technology. 

\AMAZED: Consultant Makes Brilliant Recommendation
Here's the acme of recommendations in all of this background, which you have been kind to sit through attentively:
I think Dopfner should do with BusinessInsider what it did with Bild.de, growing it into new branches that can reach a critical mass and be re-integrated into the core Axel  Spring. group. They should not brand BusinessInsider to Axel Springer. It's not necessary and gives readers a diminished sense of diversity. The key here is to grow a culture of innovative journalists for English readers. Axel Spr. if the top dog in Europe, but they were struggling in the English markets until now. They could expand the accelerator idea to innovative journalism, having power teams work together with other teams to collaborate. Take some of the core cultural ambassadors at BusinessInsider and get them to work around the folks at Facebook Dublin, since Irish tech is growing and English skills sound friendly to the Western and European English-speaking audiences. They can grow to UK, then set up another team in Australia. They can set the culture in motion at these places, building new divisions with a new focus like they did with Bild.de, then integrate it back into the larger company.

\IDENTITY CRISIS: To Tech or Not to Tech?
Axel Spr. can keep a strong presence in Silicon Valley but ultimately the difference between a publishing company and technology company has put them at a major disadvantage against Google. Bezos, Amazon CEO, had his personal investment company obtain some ownership of Axel Spring and that would be important to keep growing. Amazon has the distribution potential with its subscription apps, readership, AWS server reach, and affiliate programs to entice distribution and promotion.

\WELCOME TO THE (AMAZON) JUNGLE: Bezos Alliance with Axel Springer SE
Axel Spr. may not be able to compete with Google directly, but this partnership with Bezos can be very helpful in reaching more people and building the culture of innovative journalism that is so central to Axel Spr. strategy. Amazon goes against Google and has the resources to fight technology battles. Axel Spr. can leverage technology leadership, which Amazon has, in exchange for content leadership to entice viewers, which Axel Spr. has and Amazon very much needs for its strategy. 

\FINAL SCORE: Journalism Prevails
Through these channels, which we can summarize as leveraging acquisitions to build culture and strengthening alliances with technology leaders, Axel. Spr. can move up the chain and close in on the top 5 spots for global digital media distribution. 

Thank you for your attention for this presentation. I will answer any questions you may have.





Possible Questions:
1. What would be your recommendation for acquisitions? Continue if they are in English and represent innovative journalism. Get Bezos to pay for some of it to strengthen alliance between Amazon (technology leader, online publishing technology) and Axel Springer SE (publishing leader, dabbles in technology).
2. What should Ax. Spr. do internally to carry out strategy? The focus on incubating new branches until they have their own identify is a key part of Ax. Spr. success. This is something I/O psychology consultants can assist with, facilitating cultural growth through Process Consulting, Lewin's change model, group facilitation, coaching, etc.
3. How can Ax. Spr. leverage diversity for their strategy? The English speaking audiences are active online in the Western audiences. This is where Ax. Spr. wants to be in the future. To do it, they need diverse voices from this "innovative journalism" Dopfner talks about in corporate speeches. The innovation is spelled out on the Ax. Spr. Plug and Play Accelerator website, saying that many people are surprised at what kinds of companies end up getting funded by the accelerator. They want interesting, fresh ideas that push the limits, and this happens through diversity. It's a core part of how Ax. Spr. incubates its new teams, letting them figure out their differences without the standardizing forces of corporate. In the case of Bild.de, they did not even share a building. Not even a phone number, actually. It was all new until they proved success. They established a culture with what they had, then that culture was brought into the core company with the new diversity being nurtured in an environment where the pressure came top down to embrace change. This is crucial for leveraging diversity.
4. What's the timeline?
  a. Growing New Teams -  The Plug and Play Accelerator is a 100 day program. That's the fastest program the company has, but really it is used as a tool to identify talent they can continue developing if relevant. For that reason, the timeline for organically growing innovative journalism projects is 100 days to get a notion, one year to get traction, two years to see the projects getting proper attention.
  b. Next Acquisition? - Since Ax. Spr. wants to connect with Silicon Valley but struggles with establishing its relevance in the conversations (by virtue of being a German publisher, not USA tech), they should buy Quora.com with Amazon's help! It's a website trafficked by software developers and tech entrepreneurs asking non-technical questions like you would ask a mentor. These are answered by anyone, though top answers often go to world famous entrepreneurs. If you are wondering about a program, for example, you may hear from the CEO directly via Quora even though you would never actuallyget through to that person in real life. They give lots of professional advice for people in tech startups. It's a huge following. This would be great for Ax. Spr. They would own the conversations that for years they wish they were having. Quora has prizes for top answers, like $1000 to best answer on how Artificial Intelligence should be limited for military technology in the US, for example. Ax. Spr. can create prizes that foster innovative journalism. They can scale it on Amazon's web servers with their alliance with Amazon and Bezos. It is privately owned, started by former CTO of Facebook. It's been around for 7 years. Timeline == 6 months
  c. Other Silicon Valleys - The growth of coding schools and new tech departments means Silicon Valley is not the only Silicon Valley, so to speak. LA, NYC, Austin, and Seattle are hot areas where Ax. Spr. could make an impact while things are developing. Silicon Valley is so established that it is important but gives less innovative opportunities than these other places. Here is where some executive coaching is needed (not by me, I'm not good at that stuff). Coaching can help because Ax. Spr. views Silicon Valley as a wild place where big decisions are made rapidly without time to stop, reflect, proceed at a careful pace, etc. This is counter to the working pace of Ax. Spr. as a traditional journalism house in German with a print-only value set. They are mystified by Silicon Valley's pace, but the thing I think they may find in these developing tech hotbeds is that pace is even quicker in less developed areas and stability is needed. That's where Ax. Spr. can seek alliances with tech companies. The tech firms have the crazy, Ax. spr. supplies the stability. Crazy plus stable equals lower risk, but the returns are so much higher potentially than what Ax. Spr. sees now because they are buying finished products, like BusinessInsider, for half a billion dollars. They get some returns but it's nothing like Silicon Valley returns, where the money is in the tech. See, Ax. Spr. is just buying readers. What they purchased on that deal was 76 million unique visitors per month. Look at Facebook, who has 1 billion uniques on mobile alone everyday. Not even close, right? So Axel Springer might say they are the biggest digital publisher in the world but who cares? They are able to say that because they are not considered a tech company, but there are YouTube accounts who get about as many  unique views per month on their YouTube channel as all of BusinessInsider.com, so where's the $500 million value here? It's not helpful for Dopfner to interview Zuckerberg and draw that clean line between Publisher vs. Technology company, because tech media is media. There's nothing to gain by drawing a clear line and saying okay, we are only publishers, because tech is how they publish. It's a different industry, but the talent they attract do not need to be different talent. Top tech talent have similar values to Ax. Spr. where they want to innovate and reach people worldwide with important ideas. They may not appear to seek stability when Ax. Spr. sees these young entrepreneurs making major business decisions weekly, each one potentially limiting or destroying the business going forward. The key point to remember is the values are not different. Tech talent works for startups if they are already rich (no risk), young with no families (can recover from losses), or have a much lower than usual level of perceived risk. They want to be stable, so they would like Ax. Spr. because they offer that tradition of stability. These tech talent workers could make six figures or maybe seven by working at an existing tech firm, so they aren't going to waste their time unless they really see it's worthwhile. This is something that can create a lot of opportunity for Ax. Spr.
  One more idea: Ax. Sprg. is not doing anything interesting on social media because their strategy is to bring the subscribers to their website. That's fine if it works but it does not work. Facebook has 1 billion unique users per month, end of story. Ax. Spr. should scout social media talent who have millions of views on YouTube and tens of thousands of followers on Instagram and invite them to get the perks of Plug and Play Accelerator. I want to see Ax. Spr. building a culture of innovative journalism on the world wide web and right now there's not even one project I can point to and say yes, that's it. Ax. Spr is promoting innovative journalism with this project. Look at these key people who credit Ax. Spr. as the catalyst for change in this issue, that community, etc.

When Facebook asks if Axel Spr. will help fact check, why condemn it? Why not use it as an opportunity to say sure, we'll look at your data, but when we see how bad things are, we're going to tell people that. If you're ax. spr., it's better to be in the tech conversations than complaining about it aside. Journalism is still important, we all know that. Movies are still important, too, but nobody wants to go to a theater and watch one because we use subscription models from one of three to 10 major companies that have far more movies than we would ever care to watch and we don't have to leave the house. I think Ax. spr. can gain from getting more involved. Yes, it's far more involved than it was in 2010 and we see that in the case study. But as far as Ax. Spr. has come, tech comp. moved even faster.

All of this business of a subscription on our site vs. free on social media is really silly. Their own editor started a car blog and saw it become a Top 25 blog of Germany. They said that in the case study, where Dopfner said saying they needed to learn more about how that happened. Perhaps Ax. Spr. does not realize Amazon offers anyone -- a company or just a random weirdo with a laptop -- to publish a subscription based service on an Amazon channel. If a person subscribes for a year, they get 70 percent. After that, the company get 85 percent of the subscription. That's just the start, but if Ax. Spr. could leverage its alliance with Amazon they could work out an agreement that's even better for both parties. It would not be hard. That's something google can't do. Amazon has its own distribution on TV and movies, music, reading magazines and books, etc. This is like a dream come true at a time when people might subscribe to Ax. Spr. if they are german, but how many Americans would rather subscribe to Ax. Spr. through their Amazon account than run their card through a website in Europe? This is a cultural difference I want Ax. Spr. to explore.

In America, people use Amazon credit cards and shop on Amazon. Amazon has listening devices in homes, helping people place orders more than weekly. It's much more comfortable for people than some german publisher. Westerners are not going to be as comfortable with that. Again, this comes down to technology leadership. It's fine for Dopfner to ask Zuck if he's a tech or publ. company, and the answer is obvious anyway, but the reality is Facebook can say what they want with 1 billion uniques on mobile alone per month. Ax.Spr. is losing the tech part of a tech battle. They need to leverage their tech alliances and get a working API so susbcribers get a seamless experience across devices, payment gateways (amazon, Ax. Spr., etc.), etc.

I'm sorry if that's too American for Ax. Spr, but here, nothing less is acceptable at all. We don't care about Google results as much as it seems Dopfner thinks. The same person has Google, Amazon, Apple Siri, Microsoft, and Facebook listening devices that all have a credit card on file and each has a seemingly infinite marketplace of information filled with premium content... not to mention, each of these tools is ready in a single action and they have mastered digital convergence (same device, same content, seamless updates instantly). I don't know about Germany, but in the US people who want to know something check a few different places. It's not just Google. They get to the same place by Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Amazon, Apple Siri, Microsoft, etc.
The business of how to attract subscribers to the AX. Spr. sites directly vs. free pseudo-journalism articles on Google Results was probably important in 2014 to a degree but in 2017 it really makes no difference, at all, and is completely unimportant. Ax. Spr. needs more tech friends, and vice versa.

-------

Throughout recommendations, demonstrate a general understanding of organizational dynamics and concepts.

A professional presentation, as if you were in a real client’s office. Make your proposal in power point to the client (two faculty members), identifying and addressing client needs. This includes recommendations to client for next steps. Note: You are not pitching your consulting company in this presentation; you are analyzing the client’s situation and proposing a solution base on what you know from the case. A proposal to gather more information is not an appropriate solution for this assignment.

c. Completion of presentation and questions/answers with client within 45 minutes (30 minutes to present, 15 minutes for Q&A).
