Key points for Axel presentation

I History
II Recommendations
a. Demonstrate an understanding of the history and culture of the client organization and its relevance to the case.

b. Identify and evaluate critical decisions made in the evolution of the case.

c. Clarify the impact of past decisions on the current state of the client.

d. Provide recommendations for next steps, rationale for those steps, projected outcome, and a timeline. This would include such things as the desired culture, leadership roles, employees and their development. What should be retained from the existing organization, and what should be created or recreated as new? What role should leader(s) have going forward?

Next steps:  Find allies in European media and Silicon Valley. During a Feb. 2016 interview, Dopfner asked Mark Zuckerberg if Facebook was a technology or publishing company. Zuckerberg said it was definitely a technology company. Going forward, I see Dopfner is intent on making Axel Springer SE a publishing company. That puts him at odds with Silicon Valley companies who specialize in technology. 

Google and Facebook have distribution and platform for people to reach each other, unlike Axel Springer SE. Google could block out Axel Springer SE and selectively promote other content. Dopfner is aware of this and wants to secure against this happening. He has written an open letter to Google's CEO about how Google should be fair and promote quality content. 

This is an interesting strategy. I think Dopfner has committed to the strategy for a long time, so it is not up for debate whether they should or should not pick the battle because they already did. Axel Springer SE established a Silicon Valley accelerator, but I do not see this being closely related enough to core strategy. Previously, Axel Springer was highly effective at merging opposing cultures. In the case of the Bild.de website, the new media team was in a separate building with different phone numbers, personnel, etc. Everything was different. Only after Bild.de built its own DNA and established itself did Axel Springer SE merge it back into the core company. 

Axel Springer showed success when culture change was evolutionary, not revolutionary. Through integrity and being the voice of reason, Axel Sp. has achieved success. They established rules that their tabloid would not have German writers taking jabs at Polish writers, and vice versa. What Axel does best is demonstrate maturity and long-standing tradition through times of social unrest and inflection points in history. It made sense that Dopfner took a strong stance when Facebook asked European media companies to fact-check social media stories. Dopfner said no, it was not appropriate for legitimate media companies to provide this kind of service for social media. This is Axel Spr.'s brand. They are traditional, experienced, principled, and confident. Ironically, their biggest seller is a tabloid. Somehow these contradictions work for Ax. Spr.

Going forward, Dopfner said the pendulum will swing back and people will want credible news instead of just free, low quality stories. If that is true, what's the benefit to Dopfner promoting accelerator Plug and Play, to connect Berlin with Silicon Valley? The idea is to give entrepreneurs resources in exchange for 5% ownership. It is focused in the sense that it keeps a connection to Silicon Valley culture, but it could be integrated further into the culture at Axel Spr. The biggest threat by Google and Facebook is that distribution and free, low quality stories will render Axel. Spr. irrelevant. What can happen going forward?

Acquisitions were a key strategy for Axel Spr. in the past but they divested in 2014. They acquired BusinessInsider for under $500 M in 2015, showing that acquisitions continue to be a successful strategy. Going forward, Dopfner aims to be the digital media leader in Europe. It gives them access to 76 million unique visitors monthly in English, for a total of 200 million unique views for Axel Spr. That makes Axel. Spr. the 6th largest publisher of digital media in the world (http://www.axelspringer.de/en/presse/Leading-Digital-Publisher-Axel-Springer-Acquires-Business-Insider_24619096.html)

Dopfner says the stragegy is to be the world's top global digital publisher, with English diversified global distribution, and innovative digital journalism. I think it's hard to say how Dopfner is going to do this without building some kind of structured system to train people in the art and methods of journalism as Axel. Spring sees it. They are competing for distribution against technology companies when they go against Facebook and Google. In the announcement, Dopfner states proudly that Business Insider has the kind of innovative journalism they seek. Innovative journalism is a subjective technology. 

Here's the acme of recommendations in all of this background, which you have been kind to sit through attentively:
I think Dopfner should do with BusinessInsider what it did with Bild.de, growing it into new branches that can reach a critical mass and be re-integrated into the core Axel  Spring. group. They should not brand BusinessInsider to Axel Springer. It's not necessary and gives readers a diminished sense of diversity. The key here is to grow a culture of innovative journalists for English readers. Axel Spr. if the top dog in Europe, but they were struggling in the English markets until now. They could expand the accelerator idea to innovative journalism, having power teams work together with other teams to collaborate. Take some of the core cultural ambassadors at BusinessInsider and get them to work around the folks at Facebook Dublin, since Irish tech is growing and English skills sound friendly to the Western and European English-speaking audiences. They can grow to UK, then set up another team in Australia. They can set the culture in motion at these places, building new divisions with a new focus like they did with Bild.de, then integrate it back into the larger company.

Axel Spr. can keep a strong presence in Silicon Valley but ultimately the difference between a publishing company and technology company has put them at a major disadvantage against Google. Bezos, Amazon CEO, had his personal investment company obtain some ownership of Axel Spring and that would be important to keep growing. Amazon has the distribution potential with its subscription apps, readership, AWS server reach, and affiliate programs to entice distribution and promotion. Axel Spr. may not be able to compete with Google directly, but this partnership with Bezos can be very helpful in reaching more people and building the culture of innovative journalism that is so central to Axel Spr. strategy. Amazon goes against Google and has the resources to fight technology battles. Axel Spr. can leverage technology leadership, which Amazon has, in exchange for content leadership to entice viewers, which Axel Spr. has and Amazon very much needs for its strategy. 

Through these channels, which we can summarize as leveraging acquisitions to build culture and strengthening alliances with technology leaders, Axel. Spr. can move up the chain and close in on the top 5 spots for global digital media distribution. 


-------

Throughout recommendations, demonstrate a general understanding of organizational dynamics and concepts.

A professional presentation, as if you were in a real client’s office. Make your proposal in power point to the client (two faculty members), identifying and addressing client needs. This includes recommendations to client for next steps. Note: You are not pitching your consulting company in this presentation; you are analyzing the client’s situation and proposing a solution based on what you know from the case. A proposal to gather more information is not an appropriate solution for this assignment.

c. Completion of presentation and questions/answers with client within 45 minutes (30 minutes to present, 15 minutes for Q&A).
